====================================================
Build a blog using the Pelican static site generator
====================================================

:slug: pelican
:tags: pelican, web, python, linux

`Pelican <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.3.0/>`_ is a Python-powered *static site generator*. I design the look and layout of this site using CSS and `Jinja2 <http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/>`_ templates and write my posts as plaintext files using `reStructuredText <http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html>`_ and Pelican *compiles* the contents into HTML output suitable for a blog.

I like the idea of creating a static website. Some of the advantages:

* no database required ... plaintext is easy to edit, backup and move around
* plaintext allows your choice of editor ... I am learning ``vim``
* cheap and easy to host practically anywhere ... one option: `GitHub Pages <http://pages.github.com/>`_ is a free service for hosting static HTML content 
* no database or excutable code makes a website easy to secure, maintain and scale

The traditional disadvantage to using static pages for a blog has been the lack of dynamic elements - hosting feeds, user comments - but JavaScript for things like a Twitter widget to provide real-time updates and out-sourced services like Disqus for commenting are possible alternatives to work around static limitations.
 
This is how I built *Circuidipity* using Pelican.

Install
=======

I install Pelican and extra tools by creating a *virtual environment* using `virtualenv </python2-and-python3.html>`_ and `pip <https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip>`_. This allows me to create a sandboxed work area specific to my blog and user separate from my default Python installation (an alternative method in Debian would be to install the ``python-pelican`` package).

With ``virtualenv`` installed and using my blog as an example ...

.. code-block:: bash

    $ virtualenv ~/virtualenvs/circuidipity
    $ source ~/virtualenvs/circuidipity/bin/activate
    (circuidipity)$ pip install pelican

To later upgrade to newer versions simply run ``pip install --upgrade pelican``.  

Next I create a directory to hold my blog contents and run ``pelican-quickstart`` to create a default site layout and configuration. I add my blog details and mostly accept the default choices provided (except for `pagination <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.3.0/settings.html#pagination>`_) ...

.. code-block:: bash

    (circuidipity)$ mkdir ~/circuidipity
    (circuidipity)$ cd ~/circuidipity
    (circuidipity)$ pelican-quickstart 
    Welcome to pelican-quickstart v3.3.0.

    This script will help you create a new Pelican-based website.

    Please answer the following questions so this script can generate the files
    needed by Pelican.

    
    > Where do you want to create your new web site? [.] 
    > What will be the title of this web site? Circuidipity
    > Who will be the author of this web site? Daniel Wayne Armstrong
    > What will be the default language of this web site? [en] 
    > Do you want to specify a URL prefix? e.g., http://example.com   (Y/n) 
    > What is your URL prefix? (see above example; no trailing slash) http://www.circuidipity.com
    > Do you want to enable article pagination? (Y/n) n
    > Do you want to generate a Fabfile/Makefile to automate generation and publishing? (Y/n) 
    > Do you want an auto-reload & simpleHTTP script to assist with theme and site development? (Y/n) 
    > Do you want to upload your website using FTP? (y/N) 
    > Do you want to upload your website using SSH? (y/N) 
    > Do you want to upload your website using Dropbox? (y/N) 
    > Do you want to upload your website using S3? (y/N) 
    > Do you want to upload your website using Rackspace Cloud Files? (y/N) 
    Done. Your new project is available at /home/dwa/circuidipity

This is the layout generated by ``pelican-quickstart`` ...

.. code-block:: bash

    $ tree
    .
    ├── content
    ├── develop_server.sh
    ├── fabfile.py
    ├── Makefile
    ├── output
    ├── pelicanconf.py
    └── publishconf.py

    2 directories, 5 files

First post
==========

Posts go into ``content`` and I create a ``images`` subdirectory for screenshots and artwork and a ``pages`` subdirectory to hold things like an ``about`` or ``contact`` page ...

.. code-block:: bash

    $ mkdir content/{images,pages}

Inside ``content`` create your first post ``hello_world.rst`` using reStructuredText ...

.. code-block:: rst

    ===========
    Hello World
    ===========

    :date: 2014-02-06 23:24
    :tags: pelican, web
    :slug: hello

    My *first* post using `Pelican <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.3.0/getting_started.html>`_!

Items like ``:date`` ``:tags:`` ``:slug:`` are *metadata* that can be used in the generated HTML output. These and a few others are included in Pelican and users can create their own to use in `templates <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.1.1/themes.html#theming-pelican>`_.

Save the file and test the new blog by running the Pelican built-in development server. This will take all the ``*.rst`` files and generate HTML formatted files in ``output`` and serve up the results for inspection in a browser at ``http://localhost:8000`` ...

.. code-block:: bash

    (circuidipity)$ make devserver

The server will continue to run in the background and re-generate any updated content for viewing. Stop the server by running ``./develop_server.sh stop``.

Settings
========

Running ``pelican-quickstart`` creates 2 configuration files: ``pelicanconf.py`` and ``publishconf.py``.

Primary settings are configured in ``pelicanconf.py``. Settings can be used as *variables* in posts, pages, and templates. This is how mine looks ... some of the settings such as ``AUTHOR`` and ``SITENAME`` were generated by Pelican and some like ``WHOAMI_URL`` were created by myself ...

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/env python
    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*- #
    from __future__ import unicode_literals
    
    AUTHOR = 'Daniel Wayne Armstrong'
    SITENAME = 'Circuidipity'
    SITEURL = ''

    TIMEZONE = 'America/Toronto'

    DEFAULT_LANG = 'en'

    DEFAULT_DATE_FORMAT = '%A %d %B %Y'

    # Static paths will be copied without parsing their contents
    STATIC_PATHS = ['images', 'extra']

    # Shift the installed location of a file
    EXTRA_PATH_METADATA = {
            'extra/CNAME': {'path': 'CNAME'},
                    }

    # Extract post date from filename
    FILENAME_METADATA = '(?P<date>\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2})'

    # Sole author and don't use categories ... disable these features
    AUTHOR_SAVE_AS = False                                                             
    AUTHORS_SAVE_AS = False                                                            
    CATEGORY_SAVE_AS = False                                                           
    CATEGORIES_SAVE_AS = False   

    # Feed generation is usually not desired when developing
    FEED_ALL_ATOM = None
    CATEGORY_FEED_ATOM = None
    TRANSLATION_FEED_ATOM = None

    # URL settings
    # Uncomment following line if you want document-relative URLs when developing
    RELATIVE_URLS = True
    ARTICLE_URL = '{slug}.html'
    PAGE_URL = '{slug}.html'
    PAGE_SAVE_AS = '{slug}.html'
    TAG_URL = 'tag-{slug}.html'
    TAG_SAVE_AS = 'tag-{slug}.html'
    TAGS_URL = 'tags.html'
    TAGS_SAVE_AS = 'tags.html'
    ARCHIVES_URL = 'archives.html'
    ARCHIVES_SAVE_AS = 'archives.html'

    # Contact
    EMAIL_ADDR = 'daniel at circuidipity dot com'

    # Plugins
    PLUGIN_PATH = '/home/dwa/doc/code/pelican-plugins'
    PLUGINS = ['neighbors']

    # Theme
    THEME = '/home/dwa/doc/code/pelican-themes/chungking-condo'
    WHOAMI_URL = '/theme/images/whoami.jpg'
    GREETING = 'Howdy!'
    LICENCE_NAME = 'BY-NC-SA'
    LICENCE_URL = 'http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/deed.en_US'
    LICENCE_URL_IMG = 'http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/3.0/80x15.png'
    JINJA_EXTENSIONS = ['jinja2.ext.loopcontrols']

    # Social
    TWITTER_URL = 'https://twitter.com/circuidipity'
    GITHUB_URL = 'https://github.com/vonbrownie'

    # Tag cloud
    TAG_CLOUD_STEPS = 4

A few of the settings like ``RELATIVE_URLS = True`` and turning off ``ATOM`` feeds are appropriate for a *test* environment but are probably things that need to be modified when its time for deployment. The second ``publishconf.py`` configuration file contains priority settings for *publishing* content ...

.. code-block:: python

    #!/usr/bin/env python
    # -*- coding: utf-8 -*- #
    from __future__ import unicode_literals

    # This file is only used if you use `make publish` or
    # explicitly specify it as your config file.

    import os
    import sys
    sys.path.append(os.curdir)
    from pelicanconf import *

    SITEURL = 'http://www.circuidipity.com'
    RELATIVE_URLS = False

    FEED_ALL_ATOM = 'feed.xml'
    CATEGORY_FEED_ATOM = None
    TRANSLATION_FEED_ATOM = None

    FEED_MAX_ITEMS = 10

    DELETE_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY = True


Plugins and themes
==================

`Plugins <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.3.0/plugins.html>`_ are available to extend the functionality of Pelican. I use a plugin called `neighbors <https://github.com/getpelican/pelican-plugins/tree/master/neighbors>`_ that makes it easy for me to add links near the bottom to ``Newer`` and ``Older`` articles in relation to the current page.

Pelican includes a default theme to get you started and there is a collection of `user-created themes <https://github.com/getpelican/pelican-themes>`_ to choose from or `create your own <http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.3.0/themes.html>`_. I chose to start from scratch and explore CSS, Jinja2 templating, `pygments <http://pygments.org/faq/>`_ and `Font Awesome icons <http://fortawesome.github.io/Font-Awesome/>`_ to create my own `Chungking Condo <https://github.com/vonbrownie/circuidipity/tree/gh-pages/theme>`_ theme.

To use a theme set the location of its contents in ``pelicanconf.py`` ...

.. code-block:: python

        THEME = '/home/dwa/doc/code/pelican-themes/chungking-condo'

Publish
=======

When ready to generate for deployment run ...

.. code-block:: bash

    (circuidipity)$ make publish

All blog contents are placed in ``output`` ready to be uploaded to a hosting service. Since everything is static content there are many options available. Previously I used `Amazon S3 <http://www.circuidipity.com/host-website-on-amazon-s3.html>`_ and have now switched to a free `project repository hosted on GitHub Pages <https://github.com/vonbrownie/circuidipity>`_.

Go forth *write* and *post* and make merry!
